<br>
<br>

# Closing

If you have read this far, you must be interested in Python. There's more to
learn, of course, but if you have absorbed the concepts you've just read about,
you are already functional with the Python language.

If you did not perform the installations and code snippet executions provided
throughout this article, a good next step would be to read through the article
again, performing all of the installations and examples. When we first mentioned
IDEs (back on page 3) we mentioned that you should perhaps wait to choose an
IDE. But now's the time. If you want to put together your own Python computing
environment, you can download Python, the packages you need, and the IDE of your
choice. Alternatively, you can skip all of that and just download Anaconda.

Two documents are particularly important for your continued study. The [Python
Library Reference](https://docs.python.org/3/library/index.html) will tell you
about the functions in the Python Standard Library. We've touched on many
functions in this article, but the Library Reference is the definitive guide.
Secondly, the [Python Language
Reference](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/index.html) is a comprehensive
document that will tell you everything about the language's design, syntax and
semantics.

You absolutely should visit the [Python Software
Foundation](https://www.python.org/) home page. From there you can find the
above two documents, tutorials, how-to guides, code examples, installation
guides and much more.

If you are more of a book reader, there are numerous books worthy of your time
and dollars. On the topic of Python and data science, one book that we recommend
is O'Reilly's [Python for Data
Analysis](http://shop.oreilly.com/product/0636920050896.do), written by Wes
McKinney, creator of the pandas library. This is an incredibly well-written and
thorough book, an enjoyable read. You can purchase a digital version and then
cut-and-paste examples from the book into your Python interpreter. Or better,
you can follow along in the book with an accompanying Jupyter Notebook that
provides interactive examples for you.

We thank you for your time, and we hope you have found this article worthy of
that time. If you have feedback, if you have found typos, incorrect statements,
important omissions, or if you have suggestions for improving this document,
we'd like to hear from you. Our biographies and contact information are listed
below.

# Author Biographies

Michael Patterson has worked in commodity trading for twenty years, with roles
in technology, fundamental analysis, business intelligence and risk management.
Michael lives in Tulsa, OK with his wife and two children. Michael can be
reached via his [LinkedIn profile](https://www.linkedin.com/in/mtpatt/) or by
email at <michael.patterson@demextech.com>.

Andrew Janke is a software developer with over a decade of experience building
MATLAB-based systems for financial analysis applications. Andrew specializes in
building data analytics platforms that integrate multiple languages and
technologies, including MATLAB, Java, and SQL. He can be reached at his
[website](https://apjanke.net/), [LinkedIn
profile](https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrewjanke0/) or by email at
<andrew@apjanke.net>.

Michael and Andrew currently work at Demex Technologies, where Michael is
Director, Commodity Analytics and Andrew is Director, Quantitative Systems.
Among its products, Demex Technologies provides to its clients an online
platform for researching and quoting complex commodity and weather-based
financial derivatives.  Not surprisingly, the product is written in a mix of
languages, including MATLAB and Python.

### The Demex Group

The authors of this article are founding members of The Demex Group, a firm
which helps its clients adapt to the impacts of changing weather and climate.  A
quick background on The Demex Group will help you understand why we've taken the
time to write this article for you.

We help our clients quantify their business exposure to weather and climate
risks, and we facilitate the transfer of those risks to third parties.  We do
this by providing our clients access to algorithms that help them discover and
mitigate their risk exposures.  Our algorithms are hosted on a sophisticated,
[web-based platform](www.demex.tech) comprising nearly one hundred man-years of
efforts.  To no surprise, this platform is written largely in the MATLAB and
Python languages.

Analytics and technology are the core of our business, and client relationships
are the foundation of that business.  We share our platform and our analyses
with our clients, and in so doing we empower them and help protect them from
weather and climate risks.  This article is just one small component of that
effort: we'd like to share with you the knowledge we've acquired in our work.

# Contributors

Numerous people have graciously offered reviews, corrections and contributions
to this document.  We wish to recognize and thank them for their time and
talents.  Their names, with links to their LinkedIn profiles are:

* [Yan Holtz](https://www.linkedin.com/in/yan-holtz-2477534a)
* [Scott Buechler](https://www.linkedin.com/in/rscottyblinkedin)
* [Kevin Bowers](https://www.linkedin.com/in/kevinjbowers)
* [Michael Swearingen](https://www.linkedin.com/in/michael-swearingen-58126010)
